IN TRODUCTION . xix

ture on feasts, also the lex Baebia de ambitu, the first serious
attempt to check bribery. We hear also that Cato bitterly
attacked Lepidus, censor in 180, for erecting a permanent theatre
in place of the movable booths before used. The building was
actually pulled down. We are told that from time to time he
denounced the misdoings of provincial governors. In 171 he
was one of a commission of five for bringing to justice three ex-
praetors who had practised all manner of corruption in Spain.
Almost the last act of his life was to prosecute Galba for cruel
misgovernment of the Lusitanians. The titles of Cato’s speeches
show that he played a great part in the deliberations of the
senate concerning foreign affairs, but as his fighting days were
over and he was unfitted for diplomacy, we have little explicit
evidence of his activity in this direction. At the end of the
third Macedonian war he successfully opposed the annexation of
Macedonia. He also saved from destruction the Rhodians, who
during the war had plainly desired the victory of Perseus, and in
the early dayS, when the Roman commanders had ill succeSS, had
deeply wounded the whole Roman nation by an offer to mediate
between them and the king of Macedon.

Cato had all his life retained his feeling of enmity to the
Carthaginians, whor‘n Scipio, he thought, had treated too ten-
derly. In 150 he was one of an embassy sent to Carthage, and
came back filled with alartn at the prosperity of the city. It is
said that whatever was the subject on which he was asked for his
opinion in the senate, he always ended his speech with ‘ ceterum
censeo delendam esse Carthaginem ’. P. Scipio Nasica, the son-
in·law of AfricanuS, and the representative of his policy, always
shouted out the opposite opinion, thinking that the sear of
Carthage had a salutary effect on the Roman populace at large.
But the ideas of Cato prevailed, and a cruel policy, carried out
with needless brutality, led to the extinction of Rome's greatest
rival. Cato did not live to see the conclusion of the war3 he
died in 149, at the age of 84 or 85 yearS‚ having retained his
mental and physical‘vigor to the last. He had two sonS‚ one by
his first wife, and one by his second wife, born when Cato was 80

